I'm Barry Ritholtz. You're listening to
Masters in Business on Bloomberg Radio.
My extra special guest today is
Professor Judd Kessler. He is the Howard
Marks Professor at the Wharton School at
the University of Pennsylvania. He has
been awarded the Vernon L. Smith [music]
Ascending Scholar Prize. His new book,
Lucky by Design: The Hidden Economics
You Need to Get More of What You Want,
is out now.
>> [music]
>> Judd Kessler, welcome to Bloomberg.
Thanks so much for having me. So, I
found the book to be really fascinating
look at um
market design, which is an area that we
don't usually think about. We'll talk
about the book in a few moments. I want
to start with your background.
Bachelor's, master's, and PhD from
Harvard, but that wasn't enough. You get
a master's in philosophy from Cambridge.
What what was the career plan? So, the
career plan was to go to college and
then find a career not in academia. That
was not something that I even thought of
as an option. I was an econ major. I
thought I'd be a consultant. I accepted
a Bain New York offer to take after
graduation. But, senior year of college,
I wrote a thesis under a supervisor
named Alvin Roth. And I loved it. It was
my first experience doing research and I
thought, this is
really fun. I'm on the cutting edge of
this topic that I chose that interests
me.
And so, that made me think, all right,
maybe I should give it a shot. So, that
was the trip to Cambridge, England was
me doing an MPhil in economics to see,
you know, is this something that I might
want to pursue as a career?
And I didn't love the pedagogy in
England. So, I like the courses I wasn't
enjoying, but every day I'd come home
and think, oh, there's some research
questions that that lecture prompted.
And I realized, oh, the research is
keeping me engaged in this program even
though I don't love the coursework. I
probably should be doing this full-time.
>> What was the research topic in your
senior year that led you to heading to
England?
>> So, it was a experiment. So, I'm an
experimental economist. Most of my Not
all of it, but most of my research is
experimental, meaning undergrads are
coming into the lab playing a game I've
designed or uh we're doing some
experimentation in the field where
people are going about their lives. They
don't realize that half of them are
getting one version of an experience and
half are getting the other and we're
seeing what the effect is. So, my
undergrad thesis was trying to
understand how pairs of people could
contribute to public goods, to things
that benefited both of them. And I
learned about, you know, everything that
I could learn about public good
provision. And I varied both the
structure of the game and how the
benefits of the public good were split
across people. And this uh was something
that had never been done before. And my
advisor, Al, was very encouraging,
enthusiastic, funded the research study.
And
it was, you know, the first I I I had
this experience of looking at the data
and thinking, this is the
This is the first I'm the first person
I'm on the frontier. I'm I'm never I'm
never going to be uh
an astronaut, but I'm on the frontier
here exploring the answer to this
question that interests me. Uh I'm
looking at the data and discovering the
answer. So, this sounds like it's a
cross-section of game theory and
behavioral economics. Fair fair
description?
>> Exactly right. And it it was uh it's a
paper, you know, I I've since become an
academic and I've been writing research
papers for a long time. This one was
never published.
>> Mhm. And the reason was that in my 20s
and even into my 30s, I didn't really
know how to motivate it. I didn't know
what it was about. Uh you know, at a
deep level. I knew what I had done and I
knew that it was new and different. Uh
but I finally cracked the code in my
late 30s uh because what I had studied,
unbeknownst to me, was how couples
allocate effort to construct
uh public goods in their household. So,
the Does that mean who cooks, who
cleans, who gets the kids, who basically
pays the bills? Is it just that simple?
>> Exactly. Well, it's it's the game was we
each put in some effort. Sometimes the
production is split evenly between the
two and sometimes it's split unevenly.
So, one person gets more of the output
and some and the other person gets less.
And what I found was that in some
structures where we each have to match
each other's contribution to
generate an output uh then the
inequality didn't matter.
Pairs of people, these are random
strangers, uh they're able to contribute
at high levels. It's when we're
contributing to the public good and one
of us can cut back and kind of free ride
off of the other one. When we split it
equally, we're able to sustain with the
pair, you know, high levels of
contribution.
But, when we're split unequally and one
of us can free ride off each other the
contribution collapses.
>> going to say, that sounds like a recipe
for divorce. It
>> [laughter]
>> Well, I you know, I the reason I was
able to later understand what I had
studied in in my 20s was those are the
situations where, you know, my wife and
I have conflicts. When we both need to
contribute for the public good to be
provided, like we both have to be
diligent with bedtimes with our kids.
Because if one of us slips, then the
kids' schedule will slip.
>> [laughter]
>> Then, you know, it doesn't matter if I
care more about that or my wife. We kind
of both realize we have to be at the
same level or or we both lose. Where
Where does it um sort of
Where does that gap between effort uh
show? How does that manifest?
>> So, if one of us cares more about, say,
the kids eating vegetables.
>> Right. So, for hypothetical example, you
know, if my wife fed
>> The For us, it's, you know,
uh the the health healthful eating. One
of us might care more than the other.
And in that case, you know, if my wife
cares more and I free ride off of her,
she fed them a healthy lunch, say,
yesterday.
Uh and then I can feed them a less
healthy dinner when it's my turn. That's
where the recipe for disaster is.
>> Tho- Those are omissions. What about
co-missions? What about doing things
positively where one of you might slip?
How does that manifest?
>> Ooh. Uh I mean, most of the things I'm
thinking of are like, are we giving them
too much screen time? Oh, I guess we
could it could be uh reading them books
at night, you know? I mean, so we both
care a lot about this, so we'll we'll do
it. But, if, you know, if one of us
cared more, that would be a recipe for
disaster because that person would read
to the kids and the other person would
say, you know what? Like uh you got read
to last night, I won't do it. Right? And
that's when the the trouble Yeah, that's
when trouble starts. So, I that was my
my first academic research was exploring
those kinds of dynamics in two-person
games. How do you go from that to
studying market design? So, this was uh
Alvin Roth, the the mentor that I
mentioned. He was my undergrad thesis
advisor and when I was getting my PhD, I
committed a kind of sin of academic sin,
which is you're not supposed to go back
to the institution you did your
undergrad degree to get your PhD.
But, I wanted to work with Al. So, I
kind of I cheated a little bit. I I went
back to Harvard, but I it was
technically a Harvard Business School
PhD joint with the econ department. So,
I pretended, oh, I'm getting a different
angle on this.
>> Right. It ended up being helpful because
being at the business school helped me
transition to my current job as a
Wharton professor.
But, I went back to work with Al and he
was doing both. He was doing
experimental work and he was doing
market design work. And I had gotten
exposure to both of
early PhD student. And the
research that kind of transitioned me
was on organ donation and organ
allocation. The book has some
fascinating data points on that. We'll
talk about that in a bit. I want to stay
with your background. You end up winning
the Vernon Smith Scholar Prize in 2021.
What work was that for? So, that was for
a line of work starting with this organ
allocation work because that was
uh
both a public good study like I
described in the the earlier work
um and policy relevant. And so, the
Vernon Smith Prize is for somebody who's
contributed with experimental research
in a bunch of areas. And I had, you
know, I'd done that. I'd done that in
organ allocation. I'd done that in
course course allocation. I had done
work on summer youth employment. But,
kind of always with this experimental
lens to try to understand, you know,
what the effects were. And what's kind
of fascinating is you're
clicking off a lot of chapters in the
book which are, how do we allocate
scarce resources when there are a
variety of different ways to do it.
Sometimes it's lottery, sometimes it's
effort,
um sometimes it's people paying more to
get it. Uh which really is I never
thought of those things as market
design. And yet, most people look at
those things as just, hey, you got
lucky. You you got the summer job or the
course you wanted or the kidney you
needed because you signed up. A big
theme of the book is, hey, this isn't
luck. This is recognizing all of these
market design structures and figuring
out the rules and playing them as well
as you can. Exactly right. And I In the
book I call these hidden markets because
they're not the markets that we always
think of when we think of markets. We
think of the farmers market where you're
paying a price for produce. We think of
the stock market where you're paying a
price for equity in publicly traded
companies. But there are all of these
markets where
you're trying to allocate a scarce
resource.
You might have a price that gets paid,
but it's not doing all of the work.
There's something else that is deciding
who gets access to the scarce resource.
And then there are markets where there
is no price. We've decided that we want
to do the allocation without having
folks pay. We want to distribute it in
some other way.
And these are areas that market design
thinks about, but that a standard econ
class, like the ones I teach to my
undergrads or MBA students or
executives, would not necessarily cover.
So, other than the students in your
Wharton class, how can individuals
become more aware of all of these hidden
market mechanisms and use them to their
best advantage? Yeah, so the first step
is recognizing that these things are
markets. You want access to something.
It's scarce. There is
a limited amount that can be allocated
and you're competing with lots of other
people who want them.
Examples might make it more concrete
because we're, you know,
thinking about things that people
participate in every day these markets.
So, you want to get a reservation at a
hot restaurant. You want to get a ticket
to a live event. You want to get a
product that is hard to come by either a
you know, a clothing special clothing
drop or this summer it was Labubus, the
ugly cute stuffy dolls, but you can
think of Beanie Babies or or Cabbage
Patch dolls if you're as old as me. And
in these cases there is a price that you
pay, but there's also some other ordeal
that you may have to go through to get
access to those scarce resources.
Same thing with
benefits or or services provided by the
government. You want to get your kid
into an elementary public elementary
school. You want to get a library book.
You want to get a life-saving organ
transplant. These are environments where
you have to understand, okay, what is
the rule that is doing the allocation
and then how can you use your knowledge
of that rule to figure out the right
strategy.
>> Your daughter trying to get into her
favorite after school program really
resonated cuz it it was such a little
niche thing. Uh it's just one of those
everyday life frictions. You don't
really think of those as markets that
have been designed, but you do a really
nice job explaining any allocation of
scarce resources is a market decision.
Exactly. And that one is one of the
banes of my existence. I have to It's a
first come first serve race, which is
what I call the experience that folks
have on a regular basis
of there is a scarce resource. It is
being made available at a point in time
and whoever clicks first gets it,
whoever calls in first in in different
market structures
is the one who can claim that scarce
resource.
The after school programs at my
daughter's elementary school, this is
what the kids are doing between 2:30
when school lets out and 5:30 when
working parents can pick them up.
There are some very popular classes for
the kids to to do during those hours,
but there are a lot of kids who want to
participate in them. And so every
semester they will say, okay, on
you know, June 12th at 10:00 a.m. we're
going to release all of the fall
semester courses and whoever clicks to
claim the spots in those classes first
will get them and everybody else will be
disappointed. And it is
a first come first serve race and I I
like the race analogy because, you know,
I don't do a ton of cardio and this is
where my heart races faster than, you
know, this is fight or flight because I
know I'm competing with all these other
parents who want to get their kids into
these classes. And if my daughter gets
what she wants, mornings are wonderful.
And if she doesn't, it's, you know, I
don't want to go to school today.
>> There's some you seem to have an
advantage cuz there are some fascinating
strategies here.
Hey, maybe you don't start with the
Monday classes. Maybe you do Tuesday,
Wednesday, Thursday cuz they're going to
fill up while everybody's racing to get
Monday. And if you're disappointed on
Monday, but you've locked in the three
ones for the rest of the week, there
there's an advantage thinking about how
the rest of the participants are playing
the game. This is exactly right. So the
the
>> All game theory.
>> All it's all game theory and I wrote a
book about game theory. I didn't use the
term game theory cuz I didn't want to
scare people off, but it's it's it's
thinking about what it is that you want
and then what it is that other folks
might be going for and developing the
the right strategy for that. Now, first
come first serve races, there's a bunch
of strategy that is kind of, you know,
maybe obvious when you think about it
of, okay, you have to know that it's a
race. You have to know that this is a
situation where you need to be available
to
click as fast as you can at that time,
right? When when I get the email and it
says
June 12th at 10:00 a.m. is when
registration opens. Even if I've never
participated in the registration for
these after school classes, the 10:00
a.m. tips me off that something is going
on. At my son's school where the classes
are not as it
demanded,
there is no 10:00 a.m.s. I mean, there
might be a time when the registration
begins, but nobody really cares about it
because you can go whenever you want
that day or later in the week and
there's plenty of options available. But
at this
market, the 10:00 a.m. tells you, all
right, by 10:01 or 10:02 the good stuff
might be taken. Did your wife ever get
to the French Laundry in Napa?
This was a first come first serve race
that I talk about in the book. Uh it's
for milestone birthdays only cuz it's so
expensive. So
>> pricey, yeah.
>> in the book I I talk about how we did
not get it for her 40th birthday. So she
will try again when she's 50. I was
reading that and using your strategy
immediately thought, oh, you're flying
out just for a weekend. 4:00 is
essentially 7:00 in New York. Why not do
4:00 or 4:30 and they're they're good to
go.
>> This is exactly. So the the strategy to
play there is to think about what I call
settling for silver versus going for
gold. So the settling for silver
strategy is you
know that 7:00 or 7:30 is the most
desirable time to eat, at least, you
know, for regular people not in
retirement communities. That's the the
ideal time. If you're going to go on a
Saturday,
that is what most people are going to be
aiming for. When I went for her 40th
birthday to try to register, I knew it
was a race. I knew when the starting gun
was going off. I was there. My heart was
beating fast.
And I went first for the 7:30
reservation. Page reloads. I don't get
it. And I see that 4:30 still available.
So I click for 4:30 thinking it's better
than nothing.
And the page reloads and that is also
gone. So struck out there. That's why
we're waiting a decade.
But to your point, right? If I had I was
doing it as a surprise for my wife. If I
had planned and talked to her about it
in advance, we might have recognized
4:00 or 4:30 is
is nearly as good
>> an East Coaster. It's nearly as good as
7:30. And that's the kind of situation
where you want to settle for silver.
Where you want to go for something where
there's less competition. Again, the
game theory coming in. Fewer people are
going to be going for 4:00 or 4:30. That
is something that you actually have a
much better shot at if you go for it
first. You have to act as if that is
what you wanted all along, right?
Because when the page reloads the first
time 4:30 is still available, meaning if
instead of going for 7:30 I'd gone for
4:30 initially as if it was my first
choice,
she would have been able to cross French
Laundry off the bucket list.
>> There you go. And and the really
aside from the East Coast West Coast
difference, post pandemic, my wife likes
to point out that use apps like
OpenTable or Resy and she says 6:30 is
the new 7:30 cuz everybody wants to get
home and stream whatever they're
streaming. It's so different than it was
in the 2010s. And I'm like, am I just
getting old? Are we going to start going
to the early bird specials? She's like,
no, no one wants to have dinner 10:00
9:00 10:00 o'clock at night.
>> I believe that. And at the French
Laundry the meals take forever. So
getting out of there, you know, early
>> 4:30 gets you out at 9:00 10:00 o'clock,
[laughter] right? Absolutely
fascinating. So I want to talk about
Lucky by Design. The book is really
interesting. I I'm intrigued by
how much of what we think of as luck is
really just the way allocation
mechanisms have been either well
designed or poorly designed. Um
lotteries, wait lists, queues, scoring
rules, algorithms, norms explain this
concept that Lucky by Design may really
be based on some hidden economic rules.
Yeah, so the
way the markets
operate. There is a set of rules that
decides who gets what. So we talked
about first come first serve races. But
as you point out, there's first come
first serve waiting lists. There's
lines. There are lottery systems where
you're putting your name in the hat and
we're pulling people out. And then there
are centralized clearinghouses where you
might rank your preferences over things
you want and then there's some
priorities or rules in in the
background. And
I have this sense that people look at
these systems and they don't have a
framework for thinking about them. And
so when they participate in these
markets,
they don't really realize they're doing
so and then the outcomes seem like
they're based on chance.
Or
they try to understand them and they
struggle and they, you know, feel
overwhelmed and stressed out and then
play a strategy that might not be right
for them. And then they look around and
they think, "Oh man, that person got
what they wanted. I didn't.
They must have been lucky." Because if
you don't understand the system, then it
all seems like it's happening by chance.
But by understanding the rules that are
applying in each market, you then can
recognize, "Okay, this is a situation
where it's a first come first serve
waiting list. So I have to, you know,
put my name down early. Then I have to
think about the strategy I'm going to
play when it's my turn. Do I take what's
offered to me? Do I keep waiting?" And
you have a uh develop a framework for
for that.
Even in lottery allocations, which we
often think of as being the ones that
are based entirely on chance,
if you understand the rules, you can
develop strategies that help you do
better.
So, you know, you want to go see
a theater production and there's going
to be a
uh ticket lottery for, say, you know,
tickets that are going to be given out a
few hours before showtime.
You can go. You can enter your name for
two tickets. But maybe you can bring
your friend that you're going to go see
the show with or your partner and you
both enter. Now you have twice as many
chances. Maybe you get a bunch of
friends who work nearby to enter, you
know, maybe it's online. They enter for
you.
If they lose, they lose. But if they
win, they come down to the theater, pick
up the tickets, and give them to you.
All of a sudden now you've dramatically
increased your chances of winning. These
are, you know, technically allowed often
by the rules.
Sometimes you can enter a lottery in
years you intend to lose because
the system rewards you in subsequent
years for prior losses. It's trying to
be fair over time. And so the rules are,
if you, you know, have lost nine years
in a row, then in your 10th year you'll
get 10 entries or 100 entries or 1,000
entries relative to someone who's
entering for the first time.
Or maybe you win the lottery
in a year you don't want to win and you
defer what you get for a year. And now
you basically get to enter this year
in the hopes of deferring for next year.
And if you lose this year, you get to
enter next year for the chance of, you
know, getting whatever it is next year.
So you're you've um gone to school at
Harvard and Cambridge. You teach at
University of Pennsylvania. When we look
at college admissions,
>> Mhm.
that seems to be like a mess of
everything. Some credentials, some
skill, some checking the boxes, a little
bit of lottery, a little bit of early
admission first come first serve.
What do you think of that entire college
admission process? What's what's driving
that design?
>> Yeah, so that is what I call a choose me
market. It's a two-sided market where
it's, as you point out, it's not as
simple as any one rule. It's not like
whoever applies first to the school gets
it or they're they're going to totally
pick people by lottery.
They have a strategic decision as an
institution. I maybe I should say we as
an employee of one of these
uh institutions, but you know, the the
features of a choose me market, of a
two-sided market, are
that there are market participants on
both sides. So for college admissions,
there is applicants who are trying to
get into the colleges and then there are
colleges who that are deciding, "Who am
I going to admit? We're trying to make a
class of smart, you know, motivated,
well-rounded or very pointy people who
are going to make the class uh you know,
a a rich fun environment."
And
the dynamics are about, you know, are we
both succeeding in getting what we want?
So I think the the thing that people
think of is, "Okay, is the candidate
strong enough? Do they have, you know,
good enough grades, good enough SAT
scores, good enough extracurriculars?"
But something that we think less about
as an applicant, say, because it
requires thinking about the other side
of the market,
is
you know, how do the universities or
colleges feel about the applicants?
Well, one of the things that that they
value
is high yield.
We want the people who we admit to
enroll in our school. We want them to
matriculate.
When I was applying to college, that
yield, the fraction of folks who admit
who come, was in the US News & World
Report rankings of best colleges and
universities.
It's not anymore, but it's still a
matter of pride and reputation. Because
it's hard to say you're one of the best
schools in the country if, you know,
half or two-thirds of the people you
admit choose to go somewhere else.
And so when you mentioned early
admissions, early decision or early
action,
that is where this kind of yield
question comes into play. So
the way that it works with early
decision is when you apply, say, to
Penn, where my employer, early decision,
if you do that, you are committing to
come if we admit you. So that's great
for our yield because now, you know,
you're guaranteed to come.
And lots of schools do this. They have
an early admission deadline.
There's also early action where you're
not committing, but you can only apply
to one school early action. And so it
has similar properties where you're kind
of giving up applying elsewhere early.
And the kind of deal is that
admission standards appear to be a
little lighter.
And so researchers have estimated it's
kind of worth about 100 SAT points to if
you apply early. It's kind of we're
going to we're we like the idea that you
want to come. We like that you're going
to help us with our yield. And so,
you know, we're going to kind of be more
open to having you enter.
I now I should say I don't work at the
admissions committee. So this is right.
This is as an outsider doing, you know,
looking at the research about it.
But all of a sudden then it becomes a
strategic decision as you as an
applicant. So you have one shot in the
early decision game. Where do you want
to apply?
And
we talked a little bit about going for
gold or settling for silver. Do you go
for the thing you really want, the 7:30
reservation at the hot restaurant, or do
you go for something there where there's
less competition like a 4:30?
And the early decision game, that
strategy, that settling for silver
strategy, might be a smart play. Because
if the
place you really want to enroll, that
gold medal option for you, is too far
out of reach that even if you apply
early, you're you're you're not going to
hit that admission cutoff,
then you're essentially wasting that
application in that
uh in that in that school. And you
should be applying instead to a place
where
if you applied early, you would actually
get in. But if you didn't apply early,
you wouldn't. Some place where you're
kind of more on the margin.
>> That's a very narrow little slice. You
have to figure out exactly what your
odds are.
>> Yeah, what you can do with research,
with talking to other people, you know,
seeing, you know, how does your SAT
score compare to the ones that are
published on the website, you know, the
people who went to your high school in
prior years who succeeded in getting in.
What were their grades like? What were
their extracurriculars like? So, you
know, when these when it matters for
you, the the research that you do to
figure out how to succeed in these
markets will inform what strategy you
should play. Huh, really interesting.
Let's talk about the three E's. You
discuss what's equitable, efficient, and
and easy when people are designing
um
various types of market mechanisms. Give
us a little overview of that core
framing device.
>> Yeah, so the
the three E's are about how well a
market operates. So you mentioned them,
efficiency, ease, and equity. Equity is
about fairness. It's about are we
treating the market participants
equally if if that's our goal, right? If
we want everybody to have an equal
chance at getting the scarce resource,
is our
allocation mechanism, are our market
rules allowing us to do that?
Efficiency is about making sure that
we're not wasting any scarce resources
and whether the scarce resources that
we're giving out are being put to their
best possible use. So if there's someone
who really wants something, are we
recognizing that and saying, "Oh,
actually the
as a society we're better off if we give
that scarce resource to that that
person."
And then ease is the one that think
standard econ doesn't think that much
about. And the reason is that
prices are easy to work with. You might
not love that you have to pay a lot of
money to buy something, but the actual
process of buying something in a market
where price is doing all the work is
trivial. You go to the website, you
click a button, and you know, the thing
is shipped to you. Or you walk into a
store, you pay a price, or you, you
know, go online and and execute some
trade, or call your broker and do it.
And it's a very
it's very straightforward to work with
prices. So let's let's talk a little bit
about um one of the most fascinating
market mechanisms that's out there,
which is live performance tickets. You
use the example of Taylor Swift who
could have charged a whole lot more for
her Eras Tour, which still made billions
of dollars. Um but lots of other artists
charge less than the market bears. Um
why do these
artists not go for, you know, revenue
maximizing? What's the downside of that?
>> Yeah, so I when I think about sellers
deciding,
"Should I set a price below the market
clearing price, the price that I would
teach in my econ class is is going to be
the best for them?"
>> Here's the price, here's the demand.
Where that intersects is your profit
maximizer, but they don't do that.
>> I think So, before we get to Taylor
Swift, let's think about the restaurant
that is letting there be a line around
the block or the fad product that is
uh making it hard to get access to
their, you know, to to what they're
selling.
In those cases, I think one of the
reasons is to bolster future demand. I
see a line around the block for a
restaurant. I walk by. I might have
never heard of the restaurant before,
but I look and I think, "Oh man, that
restaurant must be really good. Look at
that line."
That might mean that I get
turned into a future customer or at
least somebody who's interested in going
when the line might be a little shorter.
Lots of buzz, lots of PR just just by
the virtue that it looks like more
people want a limited scarce resource.
>> Correct. And that it we see that, you
know, throughout uh with lots of fad
products or with, you know, scarcity
driving interest and demand.
Now, I don't think Taylor Swift has to
do that. I think we all know who she is.
I Her fans are famously loyal, and she
you know, doesn't have to worry so much
about
getting more people to be interested in
her as an artist. So, she might have
other considerations. She might
think more about the equity and the
efficiency of the allocation of her
scarce resource. And, you know, one
reason she might not charge very high
prices, which might be, you know,
hundreds of dollars for the cheapest
ticket and thousands for the the kind of
closer to the stage seats,
is that she's a billionaire. Her
Swifties
I'm sure she has billionaire fans cuz
she's such a great artist, but, you
know, most of her fans
a few thousand dollars is going to be a
big chunk of their of their income for
that month or
or more.
And so, it might not be a great look if
she's charging what would be
market-clearing prices. So, for the Eras
Tour she charges $49 for the cheapest
seats. The average ticket price was, you
know, just above 200. And so, at those
prices, you know, there's going to be
massive excess demand. Um but she might
think that that's more fair. That that
might be, you know, not just cuz it will
make her look bad, but also, right, she
might want her fans to be able to come
and only have to pay 49 or 99 or $199.
Sh- It might also be that those folks
really really want to go. So, you think
about efficiency, right? There's no
guarantee that the person who can pay
the most actually values going to the
concert the most. If her
biggest fans have less income than, you
know, the the fans who can pay more,
they're going to get pushed out whenever
the
market is relying exclusively on prices.
>> And you end up with a series of rentiers
and and middlemen that arguably
contribute nothing positive to society
and just exact a cost in the book. I
don't remember, was it the UK or or
Europe? EU that they banned places like
StubHub and those sort of ticket
middlemen? Yeah. So, this is
one of the super interesting things
about these hidden markets is that
whenever you are giving folks access to
a scarce resource at a below-market
price and there is the opportunity to
resell it, you will get
middlemen. You will get speculators or
brokers who come in exclusively to
try to extract surplus from the fact
that the market is
uh letting the price kind of be low
initially.
Now, there are economists who say, "Oh,
that's how it's supposed to work. We're
supposed to get to market-clearing
prices." But, that's not
what I argue because the seller has
decided that we
that that she, in this case, wants to
keep the price
low. She wants people, regular people,
to be able to buy for 49, 99, $199.
So, the
middleman becomes a problem that the
market has to address. One way to do
that is ban resale, but then you get
situations where this was the London
Olympics where there were seats that
were empty to see some of the events
when there were people standing outside
the stadium who would
desperately want to get in, but because
there's no way for the tickets to be
redistributed, you know, you end up with
empty seats, which is clearly
inefficient.
>> Well, you could redistribute them at a
10% markup or something like that. So,
there's And only once. You can't just go
10 10 10 10 10.
>> So, this is the the question is, you
know, how do we innovate in this market?
So, in the book I have some ideas about
how to do it. I think one key problem
with how a lot of live event tickets are
being allocated is that they're relying
on first come, first serve. Mhm.
Uh first come, first serve races is the
way that we do it on the internet now.
And that allows the ticket brokers to
program bots that will race faster than
any human can. And
that is going to mean that the folks who
are building the bots with the intention
of
getting a bunch of tickets and reselling
them
uh are going to be at an advantage and
be able to extract surplus.
The FTC
sued Ticketmaster a few months ago about
this issue, basically letting
there be bots on the platform that
extract
>> Including their own bots that then
resell at higher prices.
>> Well, this is the part of the problem,
which is the the
secondary market platforms, the ones
that are facilitating the trades between
the the brokers or or regular people who
buy tickets, but then, you know, can't
go and have to resell them.
The
those
platforms are benefiting from the sales.
They get hefty fees. I bought tickets
recently, and my calculation was that
Ticketmaster, where I was, you know,
reselling them, I was buying them, and
then I I had friends who canceled, I had
to resell them, was getting 30% of the
transaction price.
>> think the artists would be the one that
should garner
those gains. I've I've heard um I I love
the expression um
"Crypto is a solution in search of a
problem." One would imagine that if the
tickets, and I'm not a
you know, Bitcoin bro, but if you could
sell tickets on the blockchain and
there's a smart contract built into that
that the artist gets half of the resale
price,
it changes the dynamics there a lot.
>> So, you could do that, but of course, if
the artist wanted more, they could just
raise the prices, right? They they don't
need they don't need the resale market
to extract that surplus. Right? The what
I describe in the book, it doesn't you
don't need to go all the way to the
blockchain for it. You do need names on
tickets,
meaning
>> Yeah, because, right,
>> So, it's ticket and ID, not just a scan.
>> yeah, and that seems complicated cuz
then it's like, "Oh, I'm going to the
It's like going to the airport. I don't
want to go to a concert to be like going
to an airport." Although, last concert I
went to I had to go through security
anyway, right?
>> detector at Madison Square Garden for a
Knicks game, so
>> Exactly. But but no, your phone can
identify who you are. If I tap my
tickets through my phone, right, it can
validate who I am. Facial recognition is
getting very good. And so, you know,
there's Clear, the uh service you use at
the airport if if that's something
you've subscribed to, they have similar
style
products that get used at venues. Uh
Major League Baseball has had a version
of this that they uh rolled out at some
point. And so,
mhm.
validating that you are named on the
ticket is easy to do uh or getting
easier.
If you don't have that, then you could
you could put some cap on resale, but
then, you know, it doesn't nothing stops
anybody if they have a physical ticket
from doing
what used to happen, which is standing
ou- you know, outside the venue and
selling them or or selling them on some
third-party platform that's not tracking
how much more the the ticket is, you
know, being paid for. Right? If it's in
cash, there's no way to validate that
it's only 10%.
And then the other thing you have to do,
and this is trickier,
uh or not trickier, but it kind of it it
is a different type of change, is get
away from first come, first serve.
Because even if you have names on
tickets, but you're doing a first come,
first serve race, the folks who program
the fastest bots are still going to be
able to extract surplus. So, could
someone like Taylor Swift with an army
of Swifties say, "Sign up here, and it's
two tickets per name, and you have to be
in their system for that long." And so,
at least what is Madison Square Garden?
25,000 people? At least the first 10,000
tickets are going to go to local people
who are our fan base.
>> So, the for the Eras Tour that I that we
started talking about, they did
something
similar where they did a uh verified fan
process. We had to validate who you
were, and then folks came to the uh
website if they were lucky enough to
after being verified to win a lottery to
get
>> a lottery.
>> Still a lottery, but then then
>> lottery.
>> Fairer lottery among people that they
thought were were real folks rather than
uh brokers.
And then you had to wait in a virtual
queue and and wait for some people
hours. So, what ended up happening was
uh they claimed there were a lot of bot
attacks. People that didn't have the
verified fan code that they needed to
buy the tickets were coming and the
systems ground to a halt and they
crashed and people were waiting for
hours. And so, all of a sudden you had a
first come, first serve line built into
the system that was supposed to be a
lottery where now you're going through
an ordeal. We talked about, you know, is
the market easy? It's not easy if you
have to wait online in front of your
computer for hours. It's almost as
painful as having to wait outside the
box office, which we used to do for
hours. And so, you know, I think the
solution is to actually lean more on the
lottery and basically say, "Look,
at some point we're just going to have
you put your name in, say what your
preferences are, what shows you want to
see her perform at, which sections you'd
be willing to buy tickets for,
and you're going to enter yourself in
and we will tell you whether you won,
but you don't have to be there and pick
the specific seats. Right, you can say I
want I prefer to be in the center and
I'm willing to pay more, whatever, but
but that would make the participation in
the market way easier. You could run you
know, whole tours or sections of tours
at once. You could reward folks who are
more flexible. If I'm willing to see
Taylor Swift perform at any venue,
you know, on the East Coast and I'll go
to any show and sit in any section, I am
revealing myself to be a very big
Swiftie. That there is efficient
>> that wants to flip the ticket.
>> Well, but if the names are on it, then
I'm stuck. If I have to return if I
can't go, I have to return it to the to
you know, to Swift and she can give it
to somebody on the waitlist.
But on the randomized waitlist, like you
could design the system to basically cut
out the brokers altogether. So, the
craziest thing about the brokers in the
US, I heard stories from several people
who said, "Rather than pay the markup in
the US, it was cheaper to secure tickets
in Paris or London,
fly over there, stay in a hotel for a
few days, go to the show and go home."
That was less expensive than paying full
boat to any of the SeatGeek, StubHub
middle men that, you know, they charge
what the market will They charge what
the market will bear. They don't add
anything to the production and yeah, it
could be you know, and you get a
vacation out of it. You go to Paris to
see the show.
Un- unbelievable. So, let's talk a
little bit about some things that are
are lucky by design.
Um one of the things that
slightly before my time, but certainly
resonated was what took place during
Vietnam with the draft lottery. Um some
of the data was pretty shocking. At the
time, African Americans made up 11% of
the population. They were 22% of the
people
that were drafted and and and 22% of the
casualties.
2x Yep.
Why did that go down that way? Yeah, so
the
situation that arises when you have
these hidden markets is whoever's in
charge of the market gets to pick the
rules and they might not be
equitable or efficient or easy.
And the Vietnam draft before the
lottery, which was introduced
to kind of correct some of these issues,
had a bunch of loopholes in them in the
system. So, you could
get a deferment for a various reasons.
You could have some some of your you
know, friends or family members lobby
folks on the local draft boards that
were going to decide which men of that
age were going to be sent to Vietnam.
>> So, if you were politically connected,
you had a better shot.
>> Politically connected, wealthier,
whiter, those were the things that let
folks
>> So, so you could have a medical
disability, you could be in college or
grad school. You could go to the
National Guard, so you would be kind of
stay stateside.
>> everybody gets gets admitted to the
National Guard.
>> Correct. So, having a kind of way to
circumvent what would have been
the task of going overseas,
it was not distributed. These benefits
or the the
the loopholes were kind of played by a
few and and a bunch of folks did not
either have the means or have the
connections or kind of know that this
was a way out. Did did the lottery and
and I learned a lot more than I knew
about it in the book. So, they just
randomly picked birth dates, your month
and day of birth and that was the order
in which people were drafted. How did
that impact how things Yeah, so they
proceeded Did Did it have the desired
effect? Well, I mean it had the desired
effect. There were still loopholes that
you could use to get out of service, but
it had the desired effect of
366 possible birth dates including
February 29th because you didn't want to
leave those folks out, you know, they
got pulled in order. They're randomly
one at a time and then the way the
lottery worked was they would just call
down the number. So, folks who were old
enough to remember this and my father's
generation, this was a big deal. And you
know, you wanted to have a later your
have your birth date picked later, so
you were less likely to be called.
Now, again, still loopholes, but folks
looking back historic you know, at at
history say, "This helped facilitate the
anti-war movement that eventually got
the US out of Southeast Asia." Because
when you have
well-educated, wealthier, kind of more
folks who have a little bit more
social socio-economic status, a little
more
power in society, when their sons start
to getting called up and you know, this
was a fair system and so it was harder
to get out,
then you saw a bunch more kind of
influential folks saying, "No, no, no,
this is not
a war we want to be in for the long
term." Huh, really really interesting.
Let Let's talk about the area that you
spent so much of your career on, which
is um
organ donation and what those rules look
like. To start, I have to ask about um
the numbers. There are 100,000 Americans
on an organ waiting list, organ
transplant waiting list. I was shocked
to read of a that 100,000, 90% are
waiting for a kidney. That That's
amazing. Yeah, I mean so the the reason
for that is that there is dialysis for
kidney failure.
>> Which can keep you alive for for you
know, five or more years. I mean that
you want to get a kidney as soon as
possible. Dialysis is time-intensive,
it's painful, it's expensive, although
the cost is borne by Medicare primarily
after
a certain number of months that your
insurance your private insurance covers
it and then it it gets handed off to
Medicare.
So, there's a lot of cost that go into
it, but of course, if you don't have a
kidney that you can get as a recipient,
you know, if there isn't a donor kidney
available, this is your only option. But
this is why the waiting list for kidneys
is so long because folks can kind of
wait for an extended period of time.
Think about another organ like a liver,
there is no dialysis. So, at some point
if your liver function gets bad enough,
you either need a transplant or done.
That's it. So, this is why the the
kidney list
you know, goes on for so long, but it's
also a major financial burden in
addition to all the the
emotional and and physical burden that
the folks the patients and their
families face.
Uh the estimates suggest that it's
basically 1%
of the federal budget is spent on
end-stage renal disease on on folks who
have kidney failure because Medicare is
covering it. You know, Medicare big
chunk of the federal budget and this in
particular this line item is very
expensive.
>> And the crazy thing about this the
another data point that shocked me is
sometimes an imperfect match shows up
and you have the option of, you know,
rolling it over and saying, "I'll wait
for the next one." 20% of the
donated kidneys are just thrown away.
This is the nature of these first come,
first serve waiting list. So, you know,
there's when an organ becomes available,
there's a list that's generated. It's
based on
the how close you are to the transplant
center, on the medical match between the
organ and the donor sorry, the organ and
the the organ donor and the recipient.
So, there's a bunch of considerations
that come in including how long you've
been waiting. So, if you've been waiting
many years on dialysis, you're going to
be closer to the top of the list.
So, an organ becomes available and you
as the patient with the help of your
doctor have to decide, is this going to
be an organ I take or not?
Some of the information about whether
it's a good match for you,
we only can learn after the organ has
been removed from the donor who's you
know, passed away, and so now we have
testing that's getting done on the organ
and there's only
so much time. Yeah, you So, you know, we
have this testing getting done and folks
are getting are learning, all right,
this it could be this organ that you
take or we can keep waiting. And if
you're at the top of the list, maybe you
get offered a bunch of organs. And so,
you know, it is hard to get through the
whole list of you know, 90 you know,
90,000 folks waiting for the organ. And
so, you know, if the organ's not great
and we can't identify somebody who might
take it,
it gets discarded. I was kind of
fascinated by the example you described
of what they do in Israel that if you
check I'm willing to be an organ donor 3
years prior,
um you're higher on the recipient list.
The theory being, "Hey, if everybody
understands this, there's that many more
organs available for transplant." How
has that tested out in real life and are
any states here putting that into
Yeah, this this was the research that
got me into market design in particular.
I was working with Al. We started
thinking about organs. It's It has this
nice feature of being a public good. If
I agree to register as an organ donor,
hopefully I won't be in the situation,
but my organs are available for
transplant if I die in a way that that
makes them, you know, available.
So,
when folks agree to register, they are
making this scarce resource, the organ,
they're making
it be less scarce. There are more organs
available in expectation if folks are
registered.
So, a bunch of countries, including
Israel, but also Chile, China, and
Singapore have built into their
allocation rules an incentive to get
people to provide this resource, to make
it less scarce. And as you said, they
in Israel it's 3 years, but you know,
can think about doing it different ways
where if you're 18 years old and you're
going to the DMV and it's the first time
you've ever been asked, do you want to
be an organ donor?
You are
rewarded if you say yes
in so far as, you know, 50 years later
if you end up needing a kidney, you're
going to get priority over someone
that's kind of in the same situation as
you, but when they were 18 said, "No,
no, no, I don't want to help out other
people." And so, we saw when we did our
research that
this incentive of being given the option
to to be a donor so that you can have
priority later on induced a lot more
people to say they wanted to donate in a
game that was modeled on that decision.
We looked at Israel and we saw when
Israel implemented it
our estimates suggest about 100,000 more
people, and Israel's a small country, so
>> a lot.
>> Yeah, it's a lot. Uh signed up in the
run-up, you know, kind of before the
they had they announced it and and they
were letting people sign up and uh it
was the date when if you signed up
before you'd immediately have priority.
Otherwise, you'd have to wait the 3
years to avoid I mean, the 3 years by
the way is is to avoid a loophole where
I got sick, I need a kidney, and I go
sign a donor card, and then I have
priority. That would totally undermine
>> purpose.
>> Which we have research showing that, you
know, that it would in fact undermine
it. Uh so, yeah, so then they they
implemented it and and it seems to work.
Um have we any places in the US adopted
this yet?
>> No, so it would have to be This is not a
state-by-state thing. The organ
allocation systems are national, and so
you would need the country as a whole
the to have a a change in the allocation
rules. So, you know, I have been
advocating for that since we did that
research over a decade ago,
uh but, you know, we have not yet had
movement on that. Although, I remain
perennially optimistic because
it's been, you know, many years and the
problem isn't getting better. So,
basically anything we can do to make
this scarce resource less scarce is
valuable.
>> Um I'm recalling Richard Thaler's book
Nudge. I think he co-wrote that with
Cass Sunstein.
>> Yep. And there was questions about
opt-out and opt-in. Um in other words,
if everybody by default is an organ
donor, but you have to opt out, the
reasons people didn't want to do that um
religious reasons and other, but uh is
that a potential solution?
>> was uh
there that was like a a great hope of
behavioral economics was that these
kinds of nudges in this space
>> Yeah, so this is a case There are many
places where it works well. This is a
case where it doesn't. And the reason it
doesn't is that you know, if you are
say it's an opt-out system. So
I should pause and say we don't we can't
do that in the US without a major law
change because organs fall under the
Gift Act. So, you know, you have to
actually make an affirmative statement
that you want
>> Got it. You know, you could make it
salvage law, so if you're not using it,
we can take it, right? But that's
people might not want to do that. But
but in the in the countries that use
uh these opt-out systems, the next of
kin are still consulted. Right.
>> So, you know, what the the next of kin
are told is that the person did not opt
out, and it de- defaults basically to
the next of kin to decide. And so, what
the research shows is that there just
isn't a delta between the countries that
use opt-in and the countries that use
opt-out.
>> Cuz it always goes to uh
that affirmative decision.
>> Yeah, and when when, you know, I've
opted in, I mean, I I might be special
cuz I talk about it a lot, right? But
but if you've opted in, uh then the next
of kin see that and and they know that
it was your wish, right? You did you
said at some point, "Yes, I want to
register." They know that that you want
to do that. And so, if you pass away,
they know that they should donate your
organs. So, they're not going to stand
in the way.
Um
it is, you know, a binding agreement to
be an organ donor, but of course if the
next of kin
don't want it, right? They They're the
only ones who are left around to sue the
doctors, right? So So, uh so but it ends
up being the case if you register
you know, the vast majority of folks uh
who register have their organs uh
recovered.
>> I I found a lot of the book had really
surprising
themes and data.
Doing your research, what's the thing
that surprised you most about market
design? What what sort of things did you
go, "Huh, that that doesn't make any
sense."?
Um one of them was uh so, at the at the
end of the book I talk about, you know,
how you are a market designer. We've
talked about you as a market
participant, we've talked about others
as market designers,
but
uh hidden market is one where there's a
scarce resource that needs to get
allocated without
prices being what determines who gets
what. And if you think about it that
way, you are a market designer for
things like your time and attention,
which lots of people want. They want to
have you respond to their emails, they
want to get on your calendar, and you
have to decide who you serve and who you
don't. [clears throat]
So
that's the the preface. The thing that I
learned was a set of market rules that I
thought made no sense, which was how we
used to allocate water from the Colorado
River. So, for for many years,
uh the the rule was first in time, first
in right, which meant that
the first folks to tap the river, to
take water out, to divert for their own
purposes
kind of always got their allotment. So,
you know, that was California in 1901
where they diverted water from the river
to uh turn a desert into farmland.
And then decades later when there was a,
you know, drought and there was less
water coming down the Colorado
the California got to keep the exact
same allotment, and folks who tapped the
river later, like the city of Phoenix,
Arizona, which in 1901 was 10 or 15,000
people, but's now a million and a half
they had to cut back, even though for
them it was drinking water, and for
California it was, you know, to grow
alfalfa to feed to livestock.
So, I looked at that and I thought, "Oh
man, what a terrible It's not efficient,
it's not equitable. The race that
determined who got what was run, you
know centuries ago. Yeah, century ago.
And uh so, you know, I'm thinking I'm
feeling like, "Oh man, isn't it great
that we don't use these kinds of systems
anymore?" And then I looked at my
calendar and I saw my recurring meetings
on there, and I thought, "That's first
in time, first in right. I'm doing what
they were doing with the Colorado River.
A meeting that I put on my calendar, you
know, 2 years ago that takes Thursday at
11:00 a.m. every week, Thursday at 11:00
a.m. is being allocated to, you know,
this this project, even if it's not the
most efficient or equitable use of my
time. And I realized like, "Oh man, you
know, there's some stuff that's
sacrosanct, like my teaching, but a lot
of these recurring meetings, right? It
it's not adhering to the efficiency and
equity
standards that I would want for for my
allocations. Huh. So, so having read the
book, I keep coming across things
as I was reading it, I was thinking
about different things, and then either
yesterday or this morning I saw a Wall
Street Journal piece
um the new mayor-elect in New York wants
to freeze prices not just on apartments,
but at Yankee Stadium on hot dogs and
beer. And there's a couple of
interesting issues that, hey, are people
going to get too drunk? But some other
stadiums have done this, and it's worked
out really well. Uh
when we look at price controls, how do
you think about rent control for
apartments
or capping the price of hot dogs? Costco
very famously has the $1.50 hot dog for
36 years. Um how do you think about
those different price mechanisms
really as a form of branding or
marketing? Yeah, I mean, I I love the
Costco hot dogs, so I can see the
branding and marketing, you know,
benefits there. I
you know I have thought a bunch about a
bunch about this because
it is it has the potential to create
hidden markets or exacerbate hidden
markets that are already there. So, I
recently wrote a piece about uh
affordable housing lottery. So, this is
in New York City and and a bunch of
major
uh cities around the world do this where
you know, they'll a new development will
be built, and you'll have uh you know,
30% of the units that are built are
going to be designated affordable,
meaning
folks are only expected to spend 30% of
their income on housing.
But there are
so many people who are finding rents
hard to bear in New York City and these
other big cities that the lotteries get
flooded. So, in a last full year, there
were
about
6 million applicants for about 10,000
units. So, each lottery entry has a one
in 600 chance of winning. And so, as a
result, folks are kind of constantly
applying to these lotteries because
that's the only way that you're going to
have a chance of getting something is if
you're applying to every possible
lottery.
But then there's all these
inefficiencies that can crop up. Maybe I
win a lottery, I get really lucky, but
it's it's not in my desirable the my
most desirable desired neighborhood. It
was still a good lottery to enter cuz
better to get affordable housing than
not. Maybe you win in the neighborhood
that I want, and there's no way but
there's no way for us to switch, right?
It's kind of like golden handcuffs if
you [clears throat] if you're getting an
affordable place.
And, you know, the same thing with
freezing rent where, you know, the folks
who are in
a rent-controlled or rent-stabilized
apartment that, you know, are going to
be able to kind of keep paying that low
rate.
You know, that's great for them, but
that doesn't solve the bigger problem,
right? It's It's affordability for the
the lucky few, but not for other folks
who are moving to the city for the first
time and and want to make a life here.
And so, you know,
I I can see why folks are eager to do
that, but it's hard to
think about how to solve that problem
without
broader changes.
>> Right, it doesn't move the needle on the
broader
underlying problem. It just for that
handful kind of raises the issue of of
NIMBYism and just not building Well,
since the
great financial crisis, we've wildly
underbuilt
single-family homes, affordable housing,
go down the list. The focus has been on
luxury properties cuz hey, there's the
most amount of economic benefit for the
builders to put their time and energy.
>> But this is definitely, you know, a
supply and demand problem. If you if you
want to bring costs down, you have to
increase supply. And you know, as an
economist, we are trained to kind of
think one step further. So,
I'd have to read the specific policy
about the you know, Yankee Stadium
concessions, right? But my my first
instinct would be, oh, if you cap the
price of concessions,
the logical next step is that the ticket
price goes up a little bit, right? Cuz
like now all of a sudden it's cheaper to
go to you know, to have the full night
out at the you know, Citi Field or at
Yankee Stadium.
Um and so, you know, is there also going
to be a price control on the ticket or
or not? And then are we actually getting
the gains that we want or
you know, are we are we getting nice
sound bites? The The thing about
constructing your own market design is
kind of interesting. Um I have a friend
Dave who comes to New York a couple of
times a quarter, uh works in finance,
comes down from the Berkshires. And
since he's one person and doesn't care
which Broadway show he goes to,
his um uh market design hack is he waits
to, depending on the day, 5 minutes to
7:00 or 5 minutes to 8:00, the prices
plummet cuz they're about to expire
worthless. Oh, Hamilton for half price,
let's go. Wicked half price. And he's
seen half the stuff on Broadway at
shockingly reasonable prices. So, as I
was reading this, I I thought about
that, and then I just had an experience
up in Newport, my first time visiting,
with the
You wrote about this in the book about
the restaurant reservations and the
waiting list. So, we stayed at this
hotel, and there's a super hot
restaurant there, which I didn't even
know about. We made other reservations
for the weekend,
and we stop in and there's a line of
people at
5:00
waiting to sit at the bar. I said,
"We're on the waiting list." He's like,
"Well, we have like 100 seats, and the
waiting list is about 400 long." Oh,
forget it. And the person before me was
kind of a jerk, and I said something to
the maître d, and he said, "Why don't
you come down later and see what the
line looks like? It usually moves
pretty" And it was beautiful out. You
could sit at the bar, it was outdoors.
So, it was like we had a 7:00
reservation, the the the goal. The goal.
I love that.
>> Um and we walked and we were going to
walk to the restaurant. So, we come down
like 6:30,
no line at the bar. So, I said, "Hey,
you're not seating people at the bar."
He goes, "No, there's no line. Get over
there." So, we waited for 10 minutes,
snagged a great And it was just simply
being nice to the maître d and asking a
question was was that behavioral hack.
Th- This is, you know, learning about
the market and the market rules and
getting inside information about when
when is there less demand? What What is
the optimal strategy in this
environment? It requires often doing a
little bit of research, but it's not
unattainable. We all have the ability to
think about the market rules, think
about who will know, the maître d, you
know, if if you're polite to him or her,
they might want you to come and give you
the the inside tips.
Uh but you know, you have to you kind of
have to either do your own research or
or have folks advise you that you trust.
Um and yeah, you can you can often
succeed in markets where other people
fail.
So, I only have you for another 10
minutes, so let me jump to my favorite
questions I ask all my guests, starting
with tell us about your mentors who
helped shape your career. Yeah, so the
main one I mean, I already mentioned
him, so you can see how big an influence
is Alvin Roth. So, he
took me in as a undergrad mentee. I had
the story in the book, and then it got
cut for space, so I put it in the
acknowledgements because it was such a
formative experience for me where
I was taking his PhD class
as a senior in undergrad, and so I was
kind of a little bit out of place
already.
And
I wanted to write a senior thesis, the
thing that kicked me off to this career
and you know, put me at this table
talking to you now.
And
I had procrastinated asking him to be my
advisor cuz I was, you know, a little
intimidated, I felt a lot of place.
Uh and you know, I came up to him on the
day the form was due, and I said,
"I want to write a senior thesis. I
would really like for you to advise it.
Um you know, the form is due today, but
you know, and this is the commitment."
He was like, "All right, all right. Why
don't I sign the form, and we'll see how
it goes." And he signed the form, and
you know, the rest is history. Um but it
was both the idea that, you know, I
could be involved in learning new things
that people didn't know before,
uh and do it with somebody who was
willing to mentor me. You know, that was
a real real big impact.
>> Yeah, I can imagine. What are some of
your favorite books? What are you
reading right now? So, there This is a
pop econ book, my book, Lucky by Design.
It's um it's in
it's in the spirit of uh another pop
econ book about market design, which Al
wrote, which is called Who Gets What and
Why. Mhm. And so, for a while I didn't
want to write another, you know, pop
market design book cuz I didn't want to
step on his toes as as
>> That's a great title, Who Gets What and
Why.
>> Yeah, and there's a little in the text
of my book and kind of I dropped that
every so often, the kind of uh question
and that wording of that question. And
you know, so that was
uh
an idea for me, this idea that you can
communicate these market design concepts
to regular folks. So, I recommend my
book, but also that book for folks who
are interested in this.
My colleague, uh whose office is next to
mine, had a book that came out a few
weeks before mine. It's called Having It
All. Uh so, my colleague is Corinne
Lowe,
and I'm really enjoying that book. I
mean, I've I've heard about everything
that was in it, you know, along along
the way,
but uh she writes about
the
time that women and their partners spend
in doing household production, and how
society has progressed over decades
where women have entered the workforce,
but the norms at home about how time is,
you know, household chores are split, uh
it has not changed. So, women end up
Really? Yeah,
the data in that book is quite shocking.
I mean, I'd been hearing about it as as
she was doing the research, but you
know, women even in households where
they
earn more than their male partners will
still be doing more cooking, cleaning,
all of that stuff in at home.
So, that you know, in my book I talk a
little bit about how my wife and I
manage our household uh responsibilities
using the concepts of market design to
kind of avoid some of these systematic
problems that that on average couples
display. Huh, really? You know, I love
to cook, but I tend to make a giant
mess, and my wife is convinced that it's
a purposeful strategy, so [laughter] she
cooks. And it's
I'm like, "Honey, we're married 30
years. You know me. Is this how I roll?
You know, you got to Yeah, and sometimes
this is the just my technique. But But
one of the things that I talk about in
the book and
>> Must you pour from so high? It's olive
oil. It doesn't It doesn't need that
high. You're not aerating it. It's
>> [laughter]
>> It's part of the fun. But no, we One of
the strategies is having one person be
in charge of
the whole task from conception to
execution. So, that means, you know, if
you are cooking, you're also cleaning
would be part of that, right? Cuz then
the incentives are aligned. When When
you don't do that, the person who cooks
can leave a giant mess, the other person
cleans. That That seems fair, but you
know, the the
decisions, the resentment comes in. And
why are you making such a big mess? And
so, it turns out it, you know, might be
more efficient and equitable if one
person does that whole task, and
somebody else does a whole other task,
right? You You cook, and I'll do the
laundry and clean the floors. And that
that's the, you know, the the split that
might be fair. You know, I'm usually out
the door early, or if I'm home, I'm at
the desk writing. So, she takes care of
the dogs, and during the weekend, I try
and give her a break and and feed and
walk the dogs early.
Um we've never discussed it. It just
kind of worked out that way.
>> That Sometimes that's how it happens.
But be, you know, for those who are not
finding it that easy, talking it out and
kind of splitting the tasks is is a
effective strategy. Tell us what's
keeping you entertained these days. What
are you watching or listening to, either
podcasts or or Amazon Prime, Netflix,
whatever? So, I am a major fan of The
Simpsons. Get out of here. Really?
>> Yeah, I have always loved it.
>> What are we up to, season 40-something?
It's crazy.
Yeah, and but what has been great, I
found
throughout my life, you know, rewatching
old episodes that I kind of get jokes
that I didn't get before, which makes
sense, right? When I started watching
>> it's one of those things that works for
just both kids and adults at the same
time.
>> Exactly. And so what has been phenomenal
for me is exposing my kids to it for the
first time. And
it is you know, I'll say so I'll make
some reference to something and my kids
will be like, "What are you talking
about?" And then I'll pull up the
YouTube clip. I'll show it to them and
then they'll be like, "Oh, can you know,
can we watch that episode?" So that has
been phenomenal. So my favorite, you
know, rewatches rewatch rewatches I
don't I don't know how to say that.
>> Reviews.
>> Reviews, whatever. And my my getting to
rewatch The Simpsons with my kids and
then you know, enjoying my own
on my own the new episodes before I
decide whether they're appropriate for
my kids or not.
Um our final two questions, what sort of
advice would you give to a recent
college grad interested in a career in
either
um market design or economics or
academia? Yeah, so academia, there is a
path forward for folks who have just
graduated college and are thinking about
this. And that is to get some experience
doing research to see if you like it
because the
market for
tenure-track academic positions is
getting tightened. We're feeling the
political winds as well as other things
have kind of Demographically, there's
slightly smaller admission classes and I
just read 17% drop in international
students. That's a big number. For a lot
of the universities that have big PhD
programs, the budgets for things like
the PhD program will depend on the
revenue streams and foreign students
coming for undergrad or for master's
degrees is a big revenue source for a
lot of institutions. So all of that is
to say that academia remains a great
option for folks who are interested in
it, but it's getting harder and harder.
Um but if folks are interested getting
and they have not yet done it, they may
have done it in undergrad, getting
exposure to the research experience.
There are our pre-doctoral programs for
folks who work with
academic researchers on their projects
and kind of get a sense of what is
actually like. Um there are master's
programs that folks can participate in
to see what the coursework is like. Um
so that is definitely, you know, one way
to go.
There are kids who start earlier, who
start in college, but I I was not one of
them, right? I told the story about
senior year kind of realizing, "Oh, I
want to do academia." So I hadn't done
any research assistant work after I
graduated. But that is that was the next
step for me was saying, "Okay, I want to
see what this is like." Uh so it is a is
a path to do, but but you should only do
it if you really want to have a job that
only someone with a PhD can have because
there are a lot of great jobs out there
for folks interested in these topics, uh
but you know, not in academia. So final
question, what do you know about the
world of market designs and economics or
even academia that would have been
useful 20-plus years ago when you were
first getting started? Yeah, I think
something I've recently developed in
part researching for the book is just
how diverse
the hidden markets are that we
participate in every day. As a
young economist being trained in how
markets worked, I thought basically
exclusively about prices and the price
mechanisms. That that was how
I was taught, that those were the
markets I looked at. And it's only
recently that I've realized markets are
much broader than that. And thinking
through the rules of those markets, how
we could design them better
uh so that, you know, they're more
equitable and efficient and easy for
participants. I I think there's a lot of
gains for us to have as a society. So
I'm excited to be working on it for the
next 20 years, but if I if I could go
back 20 years and say, "Hey, maybe focus
on these markets a little bit more
because
there's a lot of low-hanging fruit where
we could be making things better for
everybody." Uh you know, I I I wish I
knew that and I I want others to kind of
look at these markets and say, "Yeah,
this could be better." Fascinating.
Professor, really enjoyed the
conversation. Uh we have been speaking
with Judd Kessler, [music] uh professor
of behavioral economics and market
design at Wharton at the University of
Pennsylvania and author of the new book
Lucky by Design, The Hidden Economics
You Need to Get More of What You Want.
I'm Barry Ritholtz. You've been
listening to Masters in Business on
Bloomberg Radio.